I said in the last video that we were going to move on to the implementation of read sort but when I
was looking over the implementation I thought it would be helpful to go through the stable counting
sort that we're going to use first before we actually get to the implementation.
So that's what we're going to do in this video.
So as I said in the video about counting sort of the implementation that I showed you was unstable.
If you want it to be stable we have to do some extra work.
Now the implementation I'm going to show you calculates where values should be written back to the original
array and then by writing the values into the array in backwards order we get stability.
And I think probably going through the slides will make this clear in the last video we went through
sorting this array and I'm going to go through the stable counting sort for when we sort the array based
on the tens position.
And so if you look at the last video we've already sorted based on the ones position and we end up with
the array on the screen.
And now we're going to sort this array based on the tens position.
And the reason we're looking at the TENS is because the tens actually have some duplicate values so
1094 has to remain after 87 92 after the sort and 50 7:29 has to remain after 47 25 because this sort
has to be stable.
So how are we going to accomplish this using counting sort.
So what we do is we do the count just as we did before and we're going to end up with the counting array
below.
So we have two values that have two in the tens position 47 25 and 57 29.
13:30 has a three in the tens position and then we don't have any force five sixes or sevens in the
tens position.
Forty five eighty six has eight in the tens position and then we have two values with nine in the tens
position.
87 92 and 50 94 and so are counting array is what you see in the bottom is 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 1 2.
And so that tells us we have two values with two in the tens position one value was three in the tens
position one value was eight in the tenth position and two values with nine in the tens position and
that's all fine and dandy but how are we going to write these values back because we don't actually
have the values in the counting array.
And on top of that we want the sort to be stable.
And so what we're going to do is we're going to create a temporary array that matches the length of
the array we're sorting and so we're going to create a temporary array of length 6 because we're sorting
6 values and we can use the counts to figure out which range of indices in the temporary array will
be occupied by each value for example because we don't have any zeros in the tens position and any ones
we know that the two values that have a 2 in the tens position are going to occupy positions 0 and 1
in the sorted array.
And then we have one value with a three in the tens position so we know that will go into position 2
and then we don't have any values with 4 5 6 and 7 but we have one value with an 8.
So we know that's going to go into position 3 and then positions foreign 5 are going to hold the two
values that have a 9 in the tens position.
So because we know how many values we're sorting and because we know how many of each value have a specific
digit in their tens position we can figure out what range of positions the values was a with a specific
digit in the tens position again occupy.
The way that we figure out these ranges is after we've done our first counting pass and we've ended
up with our usual counting array we adjust the counts.
So instead of just keeping the number of values that have a specific tens digit we want to store how
many values have a specific tens digit or less.
So for example that index three in the counting array which currently contains the number of values
that have a three in the tens position instead of that we want to know how many values have three or
less in the tens position.
And in this case that's three values right because we have two values that have two in the tens position
and one value that has three in the tens position and so we have three values that have a three or less
in the tens position and we can calculate how many values have a specific digit or less by summing up
all the counts that come before it.
And so for example by summing up 0 0 2 and 1 we get three and that's how many values have a three or
less in the tens position.
Right.
Because we don't know have any values with zero we don't have any values.
We have two values but to invent one value with three.
And so after we've adjusted our accounts this is what we get.
So we don't have any values with zero.
We don't have any values with one or last.
We have two values with two or less.
We have three values with three or last and then three values with four or last three values of five
or last up to the value for 8 where we have four values that have 8 or last.
And then finally we have six values with nine or less and that last position is always going to basically
equal the number of values we have.
Because everything in the array is going to have the highest possible digit or letter or less.
And so this is our adjusted count array where each element instead of containing the exact count of
how many values have a specific digit in their tens position.
Instead it contains a count of how many values have that digit or less.
And now we're going to use that to write back to our input array so the code at the top is what we're
going to use.
So we initialize our temp array and n is the number of elements we're sorting.
So we'll have a temporary of Lent 6 and then we traverse the array backwards so weak diverse the array
from right to left.
Because this is going to make us write the rightmost values before the left most values and that's what's
going to ensure stability.
And so we start with.
And if 6K is going to go from 5 to 0 so when k is 5 We're going to get the digit in the tens position.
That's what that get digit method is doing.
And we're going to get it for input K and K is starting at 5.
So if we go back that's 50 7:29 we're going to look at count array 2 because we're going to figure out
that the GET digit is going to the digit call is going to return to.
And so we're going to index count array 2 and we're using the prefix operator so we're going to subtract
one from counter-weight to that's going to give us 1 and then we're going to assign input k with which
we just saw back here is 57 29.
We're going to assign that into temp 1.
So let's go through that one more time.
We're going to get the digit of input 5 and not the tens digit and that digit is 2 because we're dealing
with 57 29 and then we're going to decrement the value add counter-weight 2 which is going to give us
one and then we're going to use that result as the index into our temp array.
So we're going to assign input of K input 5 which is 50 7:29 into temp at position 1.
And so we're going to end up with this situation where we have 50 7:29 in the temp array.
So now we have the temporary at the top.
In our count at the bottom now we've decremented count array.
Two by one because we've written one value with two in the tens position and notice that it's gone into
temp array 1.
And so the second value that has to is going to go into temporary zero.
And because we're going right to left in the input array we're writing rightmost values before less
left most value.
So that means if we have a duplicate the rightmost duplicate will be written to the right of the leftmost
duplicate.
And that's what's preserving the stability.
And so now he's going to get decremented to four.
We're going to be handling value 45 86 the tens digit is eight.
So we're going to decrement counter rate by 1 which will give us 3.
And so we're going to assign 45 86 into temp position 3 and we're going to end up with this situation.
So 45 86 has gone into the temporary rate position three and count Auray 8 is now three because we documented
it by one because we've written out one value with eight in the tens position.
So now will be 3 so we're going to be handling 47 25.
That has a 2 in the tens position we're going to decrement count array 2.
So that's going to become zero.
And so we're going to assign 47 25 to temp zero.
And so this is our array and notice that we have preserved the relative positions of 47 25 and 50 7:29
because we're going right to left.
So when we write the right most duplicate value we write that value into the right most position of
the set of positions for that Ten's value.
And so we knew that the two values that have two in the tens position we're going to occupy position
zero in one.
And so we write the rightmost value in the original array and position 1 on the left most value into
position zero.
And by doing that we have preserved relative position.
So this is a stable sort.
And you'll notice now that count array 2 is 0 because we've now written out both values with two in
the 10th position.
So now one equals two we're going to be handling value fifteen ninety four.
It has a 9 in the tens position.
So we're going to decrement count array 9.
It'll become five.
And then we assign 1094 to temp 5.
And so the rightmost value with 9 is being written in the rightmost position.
For values that have 9 in the tens position k will be 1 will handle 87 92 we decrement count array 9
to 4 and we assign 87 92 to attempt 4 and we have preserve the relative positions of 87 92 and 50 94.
And then finally K will be 0.
We'll handle 13:30 will subtract one from counter race 3 to get 2 and we'll write 13:30 to position
2 in the temporary array.
And there we go.
We have completed our sort of the values based on the 10s position and the relative positioning of any
duplicate have been preserved.
And so this is a stable counting sort it works because we traverse the input array from right to left
and we write duplicate values into the temp array from right to left.
So if we know that duplicate values will go into let's say positions three and four we write the rightmost
value in the input array into position 4 and the left most value into position 3.
And this preserves the relative positioning of duplicate values.
And so by adjusting the counting array after the initial pass so that we instead of storing just the
raw counts instead we store how many values have that value for less.
So for us it was how many values have a specific digit or less in the tens position.
We can use those adjusted counts to map values back to indices in the temp array.
Now another way of doing this is to use something called linked lists.
We haven't covered those yet.
We'll be covering those soon.
But another way of doing this is instead of just using counts the way that we did you can actually store
a list of the actual values at each position in the count array and then you write the list out backwards.
So we're not going to cover that because we haven't covered link losea but that's another way that you
could do it.
Now obviously we've sorted into a temporary array so at this step here the top array is a temporary
array so obviously there would be one more step and that would be copying the temporary array back into
the input array.
OK so that's it for the stable counting sort.
The code up here is the code that we're actually going to use in in the implementation.
So now that you've seen it when we code the implementation I won't have to spend time trying to explain
to you what's going on and not having any slides to do it.
So I thought that having slides and going through it would make it easier for you to understand.
So now finally let's move on to the implementation of radix sort.
I'll see you in the next video.